# RFC-0036: Ledger read permissions

## Abstract
Read permissions allow members to retrieve current data from the network.

## Motivation

## Elaboration
Participating nodes have generally a wide range of read permissions. Non-participating parties may be able to have some read permissions in case of public networks. Here we concentrate on participating nodes.

Read permissions fall into two categories: technology-based and application-based.
The underlying technology may contain mechanisms to restrict access to certain pieces of information. Applications can define reading rights based on the following:
members 
information
criteria

There are no restrictions to reading block information for the network members.

Smart contracts may restrict reading rights to specific members.

## Internal references and dependencies

Lists of internal references and dependencies 
    
## References to best practice, examples  

### Ethereum
In Ethereum-based blockchain technologies there is no way to limit the read access of nodes, e.g. to block and transaction information. The application level restrictions are controlled by smart contract code.

### Sovrin Ledger Access Policies
Sovrin restricts read rights for tombstones [1].
Sovrin is planning a mechanism to tag data so that it can no longer be accessed. This mechanism will be declared as a tombstone. 
Provide guidance for implementers on a concrete level, prefaribly using real-world and realistic examples.
Strive to guarantee that:

- A possible implementation can be infered from given examples.
- Provide an usable example implementation as a proof of concept.
- Ideally provide an usable implementation as a 80/20 solution adhering to the pareto princicple.
- Corner cases are dissected by example.

While you don't have to adress all points, they might be helpful to paint a complete picture.
	
## Bibliography of selected references

[1] [Sovrin Ledger Access Policies V2](https://sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/Sovrin-Ledger-Access-Policies-V2.pdf)


________

Contributing authors: **Andrei Ionita, David Maas** 
Status of this document: **work in progress**  
Last day modified: **2021-04-13**

